---
layout: post
title: Git Notes
---

# Git Notes

These are updated by me periodically. I have tried my best to
illustrate common use cases, and the motivation for doing things the
"Git" way.

## Example Set Up

I'll use this setup scenario frequently. In a suitable scatch
repository (i.e. `git-sandbox`), make a fake remote:

    mkdir fake-remote
    cd fake-remote
    git init --bare
    cd ..

Now, clone it, pretending you are two developers:

    git clone fake-remote jerry-repo
    git clone fake-remote kramer-repo

Let's assume you're Jerry and Kramer is another programmer in your
group. As Jerry, let's make some changes:

    cd jerry-repo
    echo "an example file" > file.txt
    git add file.txt
    git commit -am "initial import"
    git push origin master
    cd ..

Now, let's pretend we're Kramer and grab that recent commit:

    cd kramer-repo
    git pull origin master
    cd ..

## Git Remote Tracking Branches

Git remote tracking branches are similar to local branches (i.e. the
kind you interact with `git checkout -b branch-name` and see with `git
branch`). However, you don't work on the remote branch directly, you
work on a local branch that's *tracking* this remote branch. For
example, the most common workflow is to track a remote branch, then
push your commits to it or pull commits down from it. Even though it's
a "remote" tracking branch, the branch is stored locally (this branch
doesn't disappear if you can't connected to the remote).

Git remote tracking branches always have the format
`remote-repo/remote-branch`. After cloning a repository, you can set
it to track a remote tracking branch with the `-u` option of `git
push`, e.g. `git push -u origin master`. From now on, you can just use
`git push` when on this branch; this branch is *tracking* `origin`'s
`master` branch.

`git branch` shows local branches; to see remote branches use `git
branch -r`, and to see *all* branches, use `git branch -a`.

Remote tracking branches are also what determine what is pulled/pushed
when using `git pull` and `git push` without a remote repository and
refspec (i.e. `git push origin master`).

If the current branch is `new-feature`, which tracks
`origin/new-feature`, then any branches checked out from `new-feature`
will *also* track the remote too, unless `--no-track` is added.

## Git Fetch and Merge vs. Git Pull

Recall the above point that remote tracking branches are local, so
(unlike Subversion) they function even when you're not able to connect
to the remote. This gives an example of how elegant Git is: being so
similar to regular branches, Git remote tracking branches can be
merged into local branches. This is precisely what goes on behind the
scenes with `git pull`. Here's an example. First, let's set it up such
that a developer in your group, Kramer, made some changes, committed
them, then pushed them to the remote.

    # assuming you're in the right directory
    cd kramer-repo
    echo "kramer adding gibberish" >> file.txt
    git commit -am "I added some gibberish"
    git push
    cd ..

Now, imagine you (Jerry) have made some commits but want to see what
the status of the remote looks like. `git remote show` can be used to
see if the local remote tracking branch is out of date. 

    vinceb@poisson$ git remote show origin
    * remote origin
      Fetch URL: /Users/vinceb/Desktop/git-sandbox/fake-remote
      Push  URL: /Users/vinceb/Desktop/git-sandbox/fake-remote
      HEAD branch: master
      Remote branch:
        master tracked
      Local branch configured for 'git pull':
        master merges with remote master
      Local ref configured for 'git push':
        master pushes to master (local out of date)
        
So we are out of date! We can see these commits before merging them in
with `git fetch`. `git fetch` updates your remote tracking branch with
the new changes, allowing you to `diff` branches just as you would
with two regular branches.

    vinceb@poisson$ git diff master origin/master
    diff --git a/file.txt b/file.txt
    index 4e850ce..34ceb34 100644
    --- a/file.txt
    +++ b/file.txt
    @@ -1 +1,2 @@
     an example file

`git log origin/master master` also works. `git log origin/master
^master` shows us just the new commits. We could really explore these
commits by checkout out the remote tracking branch (but consider this
to be "taking a visit"; don't commit anything). Suppose we did, and we
decide we want to merge them with our current branch. For this, we
just use `git merge`: remember remote tracking branches are just
branches!

    vinceb@poisson$ git branch ## always check what branch you're on!
    * master
    vinceb@poisson$ git merge origin/master
    Updating ee922a9..8c8c240
    Fast-forward
     file.txt |    1 +
     1 files changed, 1 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
    
Note that `git pull` basically is `git fetch && git merge`.

## Great resources

 - [Git From the Ground Up](http://ftp.newartisans.com/pub/git.from.bottom.up.pdf)
 - [Git Reference](http://gitref.org/)
